---
title: "a04 Databases, logs, errors, and middleware"
description: "This assignment for COMP 426 will help you create and connect a database and to record access and error logs and for your API server from a03 with some middleware.
This is an important piece of building an API, because it allows you to break down what happened if something goes wrong.
It also helps other developers use and deploy your software."
draft: false
category: assignment
weight: 40
---

DUE: `2022-03-29T00:00:00-5:00`

GitHub Classroom Assignment Invite: https://classroom.github.com/a/GQsrzvZT

Issues: https://github.com/comp426-2022-spring/a04/issues

## Logging transactions and handling errors

This assignment for COMP 426 will help you to create and connect a database and to record access logs and test errors for your API server from a03 with some middleware.
This is an important piece of building an API, because it allows you to break down what happened if something goes wrong.
It also helps other developers use and deploy your software.

You should start with your `server.js` script from a03.

### Documentation

The below code block should serve in part as a guide for this assignement.

If your `server.js` script is run with the option `--help`, it should echo ONLY the following help message to STDOUT and then exit 0.

> Note that if you try to test this using `npx nodemon server.js --help` it will display *nodemon's* help message.
> Also, in order for this to work properly, the conditional has to come before all of the dependencies in your script, with the exception of whatever library you are using to parse command line arguments (minimist, yargs, etc.).

```
server.js [options]

  --port	Set the port number for the server to listen on. Must be an integer
              between 1 and 65535.

  --debug	If set to true, creates endlpoints /app/log/access/ which returns
              a JSON access log from the database and /app/error which throws 
              an error with the message "Error test successful." Defaults to 
			  false.

  --log		If set to false, no log files are written. Defaults to true.
			  Logs are always written to database.

  --help	Return this message and exit.
```

As you can see, you will need to include multiple command line options with defaults.

If you are using minimist, to do this, look at the documentation to see how arguments are stored in the `argv` object that minimist gives you: https://github.com/substack/minimist 

### Creating a database

Use the methods that we have gone over in class to create a database file called `log.db` using `better-sqlite3` with a table named `accesslog`.
Set up the `accesslog` table with columns corresponding to variables listed below. 

The notes from [w08](w/08) should help with this.

### Logging to database

Write a middleware function that inserts a new record in a database containing all of the variables in the following data object:

```
	let logdata = {
        remoteaddr: req.ip,
        remoteuser: req.user,
        time: Date.now(),
        method: req.method,
        url: req.url,
        protocol: req.protocol,
        httpversion: req.httpVersion,
        status: res.statusCode,
        referer: req.headers['referer'],
        useragent: req.headers['user-agent']
    }
```

> NOTE: the above object previously contained a reference to `secure: req.secure,` but passing this to better-sqlite3 causes it to choke because the data cannot be coerced into a form that it will accept without a bunch of work. SO, skip it. It's not important for the purposes of this assignment.
 
Remember that you have to include `next()` at the end of your middleware or it will hang.

And also remember to include it in the list of parameters passed to your middleware:

```
app.use( (req, res, next) => {
// Your middleware goes here.
})
```

### Create endpoints

These endpoints should be available if AND ONLY IF the command line option `--debug=true` is passed when `server.js` is run.

#### /app/log/access

Create a new endpoint `/app/log/access` that returns all records in the `accesslog` table in your database `log.db`.

#### /app/error

Create an endpoint `/app/error` that returns an error in the response.

The error should read "Error test successful."

>HINT: This should *just work* if you model your endpoint on the first example in the error documentation from Express: http://expressjs.com/en/guide/error-handling.html

### Create an access log file

In addition to the log in your database, if AND ONLY IF `--log=true` is passed when running `server.js`, then your server should create a file called `access.log` and write your access log to it in a *combined* format.

Use `morgan` to accomplish this by sending its output to a write stream from the `fs` builtin:

```server.js
...
// Use morgan for logging to files
// Create a write stream to append (flags: 'a') to a file
const WRITESTREAM = fs.createWriteStream('FILE', { flags: 'a' })
// Set up the access logging middleware
app.use(morgan('FORMAT', { stream: WRITESTREAM }))
...
```

You will need to change everything in ALLCAPS above to suit the instructions.

## List of requirements

1. Return help message to STDOUT and exit 0 if command line argument `--help` is passed.
2. Use better-sqlite3 to create a database `log.db` and populate it with one table `accesslog` with the variables listed above in the `logdata` object.
3. Write a middleware function that writes the `logdata` object variables into the `accesslog` table in `log.db`.
4. Create endpoints `/app/log/access` and `/app/error` that send a response in the form of an access log and an error test, respectively, when `--debug` is passed as a command line argument.
5. Write a combined format access log to an `access.log` file when `--log` is passed as a command line argument.
6. As usual, include a command line argument to set an arbitrary port number that defaults to 5555.
