---
title: "a99 Final Project"
description: "Create a game or other browser-based application that stores user information using a backend API & database."
draft: false
weight: 990
enableToc: true
tocLevels: ["h2", "h3", "h4"]
---

## Overview

As a small team, you will create an app that has users and that tracks some information related to the those users.
The app will be fully documented, including setup instructions, full API documentation, and user instructions, as well as your planning workflow.

The final product is due on the day set for the final exam by the university.

## Deliverables

A GitHub repository containing your code and documentation.
Your project should take the form of a Node package, with all of the attendant items associated with that. 

The code should incorporate the following:

1. Back-end specifications
	1. API built on whatever framework you choose.
	2. API root endpoint at `http://HOST/app/`.
	2. Should create (if nonexistent) and interact with a database of users and interactions. These can be separate databases or separate tables in one database.
	3. Database can be of any type you choose.
2. Front-end specifications
	1. Give users the ability to register an account, update their information, see their information somewhere, and delete their account.
	2. Interactions with the front end should be logged in a database. 
3. Database specifications
	1. User database - registration details (username, password, email address, etc.)
	2. Interaction database - details of user interactions (login history, gameplay history, save points, scores, etc.)
4. Documentation
	1. License documenation - Choose a license and include it in the repository just like we have been.
	1. README.md file with basic descriptiong, installation requirements/instructions, dependency list, run instructions
	3. `/docs/` directory containing full documentation of every available API endpoint that you create for your app. This directory shoud also house an archive of your planning documentation. 
	2. Code comments (preferably referring to the documentation)
	3. User instructions in the interface
	
5. Demo
6. Self/group evaluation

## Logistics

You will be working in a small team (approximately 5 people) for the final project assignment. 

Your team will be responsible for planning the project, determining roles, and then employing a collaborative workflow to build out your project.
Different people will be interested in different parts of the project.
Not everyone has to do the same things, nor should they.

Your team will also be responsible for meeting with an LA to check in weekly over the next few weeks to help you make progress through the assignment.

The project teams will be managed through GitHub classroom.
Teams are created/assigned when you accept the assignment.
So, if you have a group of people you want to work with, the best way to set this up is to meet and accept the assignment at the same time so that you can choose the team together. 
GH classroom is configured to cut off teams at 5 people.

### Using collaboration features on GitHub

The initial README.md file in your team's GitHub repo has some beginning steps instructions in it.
It is replicated below. 

```README.md
# a99 Finally

COMP426 final project template repository. All your code and documentation goes here. Change this text to be a brief description of your final project. Put the name in the header above. You will change everything below to be the main technical documentation, as outlined below.

## First steps

Other steps that you will need to take after you have cloned this repository:

1. Choose and update the LICENSE file accordingly. 
2. Edit this README.md file and use it as the main location of your technical documentation with links out to information contained under `/docs/`.
3. Create a `/docs/` directory for more elaborate documentation of your API, planning notes, etc.
4. Make sure that all of your team members have access to the repository as administrators.
5. Create a project under the **Projects** tab. Use this to manage your planning. Create a To-do list, etc. Explore the tools available and user them to manage your project.
7. Assign team roles and include a listing of those roles in this README.md file or in another file under `/docs/`.
8. Then put your entire development workflow in this repository.
9. Use **Pull requests** to propose changes and incorporate them into your code from various team members. 
10. Use **Issues** to identify and track bugs and also to communicate about various aspects of the project.

## Team mangement

Plan to meet with your team ASAP.
Talk through identifying roles within your team.

Try to figure out what each of you are good at/enjoy doing and try to work out roles that incorporate that.

Some basic roles you will want to consider:

1. A review manager - someone to review pull requests and merge or reject them and manage the related discussions
2. A plan manager - someone to keep an eye on the overall plan and keep the project tab/to-do list up to date
3. A documentation manager - someone to keep the documentation in order and identify what is missing and needs to be documented
4. Roles for team members to take charge or different parts of the project. Possible roles:
    1. Front end lead
    2. Back end lead
    3. Databse lead
    4. Design lead
    5. Etc.

You will notice that there are more roles than people in your group.
That is because you will all be doing a hybrid job of managing a thing while working on other things.

## Check in with instructional staff

Once all the groups are together, we'll assign each group to an LA to check in with as you progress through the project.

We will post that so that your team can schedule a time for an initial check-in with your assigned LA. It would be a good idea also to add your LA to your repository.

## Assignment instructions

And that is about all you need to get started.

All the rest of the assignment instructions are available at: https://comp426.johndmart.in/assignments/99

Good skill, and have fun with this!
```

#### Pull requests

I *STRONGLY* recommend using pull requests feature to manage contributions, changes, and discussions about your code and documentation.
This makes everything a lot easier and you are less likely to overwrite someone elses work, run into merge conflicts, etc. 
It is a built-in collaborative workflow.

Use it.

#### Issues

Additionally, use the issues feature to manage bug-fixing and feature discussions.
It makes things easier to keep track of.

#### Projects

There is a "Projects" tab available in your team repo.
This is a great place to organize your work rather than relying on email, Google docs, etc.
This also allows us (the instructional staff) to see how your project is progressing and to help you with questions and issues because it will give us context.

Use it.

## Expectations

The expectations for this project is something along the lines of a working prototype.
It does not have to be beautiful, it just has to work for the most part.
And it does not have to be feature rich, it just has to do some pretty basic things.

I expect and encourage inter-team collaboration as well.
If there is something that your team finds useful: make a Piazza post about it!

The repositories for this project will be created under the course organization as open source.
This is intentional to encourage you to share things and learn from what your peers are doing.  

Finally, be creative!

This doesn't mean that what you build has to be earth-shattering.
It can be whatever your team wants it to be.

### Games

I have suggested building a game for this project because games are fun and weird and can incorporate a wide variety of styles, techniques, tools, and features.

We can also interpret the genre "game" very widely.
One of your TAs, for instance, developed a sports betting app when he took this class.
The parameters for what makes a game a game are wide open.

Plus, it's fun.
You'll have your whole careers to do boring stuff.
I'm giving you an opportunity to do something that you find interesting and fun instead of dull and terrible.
We learn better when we are relaxed and enjoy ourselves, so, relax and enjoy this process by making something amusing, distracting, silly, useless, or engaging.

## Some examples to think about

Below is a smattering of examples of JS games to inspire you. 

### Simple JS Games and other examples

[dhmstark — incremental games](https://kastark.co.uk/articles/incrementals.html) - Katherine Stark

[dhmstark — developing incrementals](https://kastark.co.uk/articles/incrementals-part-2.html) - Katherine Stark

The above two tutorials are VERY useful for getting started and beginning to work with saving information.

[BEST 7 JAVASCRIPT GAMES EXAMPLES FOR BEGINNERS WITH SOURCE CODE](https://devdevshow.com/javascript-games-examples-for-beginners/) - Abderrahim Tijani

[Learn JavaScript by building 7 games](https://www.freecodecamp.org/news/learn-javascript-by-building-7-games-video-course/) - Beau Carnes

[22 JavaScript Projects You Can Build to Perfect Your Coding Skills](https://mikkegoes.com/javascript-projects-for-beginners/) - Mikke Goes Coding

[Game Development Tutorials](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Games/Tutorials) - Mozilla Developer Network

### More complex

#### JS Solitaire - Ted Walther ([@warpedpuppy](https://github.com/warpedpuppy))

Ted is a friend and software developer who mostly does instruction.
His tutorials are interesting and excellent.
This is a great example

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube-nocookie.com/embed/hasFnKRrT0Y" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>

[YouTube link](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hasFnKRrT0Y&t=3717s)

[GitHub source repo:](https://github.com/warpedpuppy/solitaire-tutorial)

#### Universal Paperclips - Decision Problem

Universal Paperclips is, hands down, my favorite browser-based game.
It's entirely written in JS and runs in browser.

[Universal paperclips](https://www.decisionproblem.com/paperclips/)

[Fork/mirror of original source code by Frank Lantz](https://github.com/jdmar3/paperclips/tree/frank)

#### Regex Crossword

Another favorite of mine AND a great way to hone your skills with regular expressions.

This site is a good example of an online game with a backend that stores user info and tracks gameplay. Try it out!

[Regex Crossword](https://regexcrossword.com/)
